welcome to talkcast and to chapter nine
of the fabric of reality part one of my
discussion about quantum computers as
the chapter is called as with many of
David Deutsch's chapters in his two
books this chapter perhaps more than any
other could be turned into an entire
book on its own it's about quantum
computers yes but it's also about the
history of computation more broadly it's
also about areas of mathematics about
Quantum cryptography and how it is that
we come to know about the world and the
tension between quantum physics and
classical physics all of this comes to
bear on the contents of this chapter and
so it's why I say this could easily be a
book all on its own in fact having read
a lot of Popular Science myself over the
years I would say that this chapter has
more substance than many other popular
science books out there on similar
topics quantum computation as I've
observed here on topcast before is a
multi-billion dollar multinational
industry now people and nations are
racing to construct the first
Universal quantum computer the computer
that could do anything that any other
quantum computer can do at the moment we
only have special purpose quantum
computers but there are dozens perhaps
more than that perhaps hundreds of
research institutes militaries
universities all engaged in trying to
improve Quantum Computing technology
especially the hardware of quantum
computer technology but many of them
were working on Quantum algorithms the
software as well that would run on these
computers that would enable us to do
faster computations for certain tasks
there are a variety of Hardware
approaches to this problem of how do you
make a good quantum computer how do you
improve the quantum computer
architecture I'm going to avoid talking
about the different approaches I've
mentioned these in my series on the
beginning of infinity and in fact one of
the experiments that David Deutsch
mentions in this chapter chapter 9 of
the fabric of reality is something that
I talk about at length in the Multiverse
chapter of the beginning of infinity so
although in this chapter we'll see there
is a lot of double up between what I've
talked about on previous episodes of
talkcast and this chapter here I'm still
going to take this chapter in two parts
the first part is more contextual about
I suppose setting the scene for what the
problem is that quantum computers are
going to solve and in the second half
we'll talk a little bit more about the
inner workings in principle from a God's
eye perspective so to speak from a high
level abstract perspective of how these
things would work in general Quantum
Computing is an exciting emergent field
perhaps it's moved a little more slowly
than some of the pioneers of the field
expected it to move but it is making
progress and it offers the exciting new
possibility of a new way of computing
stuff and solving problems that hitherto
were intractable for other kinds of
computers namely the classical computers
that we have in particular Quantum
compute leaders can efficiently simulate
Quantum systems like atoms and molecules
and well in principle anything because
everything is quantum ultimately aside
from Gravity so far as we know but there
are mathematical problems and scientific
problems that could benefit from a fully
functioning Universal quantum computer
so let's get into the chat and to see
what David said some 25 years ago now on
the subject but which is as relevant
today as it ever was because these are
Universal claims about a universal truth
about the world so here we are chapter
nine quantum computers and David
Wright's quote to anyone new to the
subject Quantum computation sounds like
the name of a new technology the latest
perhaps in a remarkable succession that
has included mechanical computation
transistorized electronic computation
silicon chip computation and so on and
it is true that even existing computer
technology relies on microscopic quantum
mechanical processes of course all
physical processes are quantum
mechanical but here I mean ones for
which classical physics I.E non-quantum
physics gives a very inaccurate
predictions if the trend towards ever
faster more compact computer hardware is
to continue the technology must become
even more quantum mechanical in this
sense simply because quantum mechanical
effects are dominant in all sufficiently
small systems end quote okay so my
reflection on that so the issue is this
classical computers consist of circuitry
and the circuitry transmits electrons
from one place to another to perform the
mechanical task of computation now
electrons in one place represent memory
being stored electrons moving in this
place represent some sort of computation
being performed and well if you want
things to move faster then you pack more
of all of that into a smaller space
among other things so if you're packing
your circuitry into a smaller space
eventually the wiring effectively gets
closer and closer together and if you've
got electrons going this way and
electrons whizzing that way well you
don't want them to cross over if they
cross over it's like a car collision you
know you want the traffic to be moving
nice and parallel and never the twain
shall meet but if electrons do get
closer and closer together then they're
going to have a fix on one another and
those effects are going to be Quantum
effects among other things or if you
have a circuit without electrons and one
with electrons maybe these electrons
that are traveling down this road
effectively this wire are going to jump
over to a place where you don't want
them to go at the moment that is not so
much of a problem because everything's
being kept far enough apart but as the
transistors get smaller these effects
become more noticeable and this could
have an effect on Moore's Law the idea
that about every 18 months the power of
a computer or the speed of a computer
doubles it used to be the case that it
was thought that the clock speed of the
processor would get faster and faster
and faster and that this eventually
would reach a limit but well they're
doing all sorts of weird funny clever
engineering right now and just having
multiple cores on your processes so the
processes are indeed continuing to get
more powerful without necessarily
getting faster per processor so Mosler
is still holding but the majority of
Engineers and scientists working in the
field tend to think there's a wall ahead
of us and that wall ahead of us is the
boundary between classical computation
and Quantum computation if you want to
continue to get faster Beyond the Wall
you have to become a quantum computer a
classical computer just can't get the
circuitry just can't continue to get
ever smaller the clock speeds can't
continue to get ever faster there must
be a limit a limit imposed by simple
physics this genuinely is one of those
areas where the great dichotomy rears
its head either a thing is prohibited by
the laws of physics or it was possible
given the right knowledge now here the
two increasing the speed and power of a
classical computer is possible we just
had to create the right knowledge but we
get to a point where where well the laws
of physics place a Prohibition a
Prohibition on how close to electrons
can be before they start interacting in
Quantum ways with one another before
they start interfering let's say and
either that can be a problem for your
classical computer or it can be an
effect to take advantage of and let's
keep on going David Wright's all present
day computers whatever quantum
mechanical processes they may exploit a
merely different technological
implementations of the same classical
idea that of the universal turing
machine that is why the repertoire of
computations available to all existing
computers is essentially the same they
differ only in their speed memory
capacity and input output devices that
is to say even the lowliest of today's
home computers can be programmed to
solve any problem or render any
environment that our most powerful
computers can provided only that it is
given additional memory allowed to run
for long enough and given a appropriate
hardware for displaying its results end
quote so yes our modern computers are
approximately Universal which is to say
the only thing that prevents any of them
from calculating absolutely anything
that is able to be calculated is a
finite amount of memory and so there are
certain things for which our older
computers might struggle to calculate
simply because they can't store the
information they need to store or the
processing might take too long on a slow
processor presently I enjoy playing with
my virtual reality headset hooked up to
a PC computer so I can play Microsoft
flight simulator the very latest version
of Microsoft flight simulator it's
fantastic you're there sitting in the
cockpit and you can learn to fly
different aircrafts to some degree of
facility anyway or at least pretend that
you can this kind of program with its
renderings of different cities around
the world and its various aircraft to
hire accuracy takes up a lot of memory
there's no way that back when the fabric
of reality was written in 1997 that I
could have used my computer then a PC
with a Pentium chip running it whatever
it was back then 300 megahertz or
something like that on a hard drive
which had like
270 megabytes something like that
there's no hope of that thing being able
to render in reasonable time the
environment of the virtual reality
flight simulator what would have
happened is well you'd probably get an
image on the screen which was pretty
grainy but it would take I don't know an
hour to draw a picture of the city that
you were in before it moves on to the
next frame which would take another hour
to do and that's even ignoring the fact
that you couldn't fit the program onto
the hard drive anyway you'd need a
bigger hard drive so although the
processor could have in principle done
the processing in practice you need a
faster processor if you want it to be
more life like if you wanted to do the
job that you really want done so this is
why we say computers are approximately
Universal they can run out of memory
they can perform things a little bit too
slowly but this is not to say that in
principle given enough time and enough
memory they could compute anything
that's computable these are General
computers Universal computers able to
perform any task at all unlike certain
other computers which were special
purpose computers in a sense the first
weaving machines looms the Jacquard Loom
was a programmable thing device which
was able to produce different kinds of
weavings okay so that's one thing
babbage's original calculating machine
could do arithmetic but perhaps it was
limited to that although there are some
claims that certain versions of this
thing the analytical engine may have had
universality again Limited in memory and
certainly Limited in speed recently the
anti-chithera mechanism has been getting
more more attention even David Deutsch
tweeted about it recently a lecture from
some Years Ago by Tony freith who is one
of the world experts on this particular
early computer it was a specialized
computer that the Griggs were using over
2000 years ago to do what to calculate
the position of astronomical bodies
moving across the sky who knows what
four precisely out of curiosity and
interest also for navigation purposes
absolutely perhaps being able to figure
out when to plant certain things to
predict events like let's say eclipses
now if you can predict an Eclipse 2000
or two and a half thousand years ago
down to the hour it's going to appear to
the average person that you have magical
powers almost so it could even be an
interesting way to keep the citizenry in
line if they are persuaded that you have
access to the gods and that you're
telling them what the gods are telling
you like tomorrow at precisely 2 p.m the
sun will be blacked out by by the moon
that's pretty impressive right
especially if no one else can do that
but you can do it because you've got the
anti-chithering mechanism now the
antichrome mechanism this this computer
that the Greeks used apparently used to
make predictions of astronomical bodies
you know decades out to a Precision of
hours as to where the things were in the
sky this shows something deep about
reality it shows that you can have this
one-to-one correspondence between a
machine and stuff going on out there in
the universe there is this relationship
between these two things now in that
case the anti-chhitzer mechanism it did
one thing so far as we know of course
more research could be done and maybe
maybe it's more generalizable than that
maybe it could quite easily be turned to
doing stuff other than simply predicting
the position of planets who knows who
knows what we might find but at the
moment that's what people think it was
used for like many older computers of
this sort that specialize to do one
particular kind of task one thing really
well and in this case predict the
position of planets but it says
something deep it says that you can have
self-similarity self-similarity between
the gears of this mechanism and what's
actually going on in the solar system
and in the same way we can have our
computers render environments which have
a one-to-one correspondence between
what's going on inside the internals of
the computer and any environment that
you want to render and of course then
our universality goes further than that
and the one that fixates me quite often
the one that I get animated about is the
one-to-one correspondence between the
universality of our minds to explain the
rest of physical reality and that
physical reality itself this model that
exists between the Mind here Inside the
Mind inside the brain of a person and
well anything else that's out there
indeed everything else that's out there
that is known to the person with the
mind the quantum computer is a new mode
of computation so it's not like there
are additional task that it can do that
the original turing machine could not in
principle do it's just that the quantum
computer can do some of those tasks much
much faster more efficiently David's
going to get to what the technical
meaning of efficiency is one very
hand-wavy way of talking about
efficiency is that there might be
certain tasks let's say mathematical
tasks and to name one the kind of tasks
that he would talk about which is let's
say you've got a number that you can
easily write down on a piece of paper
given enough time let's say you wanted
to write down a number that was 2 000
digits long okay it's going to take you
a while to write it down but you can do
it mate you could probably get that task
done in just a few minutes now the
difficulty is let's find the factors the
prime factors of that number it wouldn't
matter if you had all of the computers
in the world working for the entire age
of the universe so far 13.6 billion
years you wouldn't get the answer indeed
for a number of that size it will
wouldn't matter if the entire universe
was turned into a classical computer
where all of its internal workings were
operating at the speed of light you
still wouldn't get an answer however for
a task like that if you had a reasonably
modest quantum computer you could get an
answer in a few minutes and so this is
the difference in efficiency now more
precisely as David explains it the Rough
and Ready definition I suppose or
explanation of what efficiency is is
that for each digit you add to a really
long number does the amount of time
taken to factorize this digit increase
exponentially does it double or does it
just go up linearly did it just go up by
a few more seconds well if it doubles or
it triples or it goes up in any way
exponentially then this is known as
intractability your device might not be
efficient for solving that particular
problem however in the case of quantum
computers it is able to do these things
efficiently and of course one thing on
all this kind of stuff talking about
what a computer can in principle
calculate or compute or simulate or
model or whatever you like
is the requirement that you need a
program to put into the computer to code
you have to give the computer
instructions but what instructions will
you give it what is the program you will
write it's no good saying well the
computer can in principle plot the
positions of planets across the sky if
you don't know what they are
you don't know what they are at the
moment in other words the initial
conditions or what they will be tomorrow
or what they were yesterday much less
the laws that govern the motion of those
planets even if those laws are incorrect
but but still enable you to predict
tomorrow where they're going to be based
upon where they are today well then the
computer can't do it either if you can't
do it if you can't in principle figure
it out by pen and paper at least
partially if you can't write down some
set of predictive laws if you don't know
where the planets are today if you don't
know what the initial conditions are the
computer's not going to be able to do it
for you the whole point of the computer
the dumb computer is to automate the
process once you know how to do the
process but you only know how to do the
process once you've used your
intelligent creative mind as a person to
write down the algorithm which can then
be used as code to program a computer to
give it a set of instructions now I know
that many in my audience are engaged in
very much that work anyway but for those
not so familiar with the principles of
computer science this is what we mean by
universality it's not that the computer
simply can do the thing the computer
will do the thing that given enough
hardware and enough memory and enough
processing power it will suddenly gain
escape velocity if you like and be able
to do all of these things no someone has
to give it the instructions to do those
things and this is why the debate that
arises often on topcast
in myself between the people who
understand what AGI is and those who
think AGI is just AI but with a greater
repertoire of capacities that the latter
is so clearly an incorrect approach
because the only way any AI dumb ai ai
that is presently used to do stuff for
us can do anything at all is because
someone has programmed it with each of
its capacities to play chess to play
alphago to translate languages to be a
chatbot of some kind or other to be able
to compose music perhaps but until it is
able to come up with its own tasks until
it is able to program itself with some
new thing that hitherto no person had
thought of before including any human
being then we're not in the presence of
an AGI we're in the presence of a highly
specialized intelligence of some kind
but not something that can ever add to
its list of tasks or refuse to do one of
the tasks that is give even to it well
there we go so yet again we are brought
back to that question here in a chapter
on quantum computers and I suppose one
reason why it's important here with
Quantum computations because people
again and again will come up with the
idea that aegi must require comp Quantum
computation somewhere we don't think
that's the case in particular the reason
we don't think it's the case is because
Quantum computation is a new kind of
Hardware it's a new way of computing
things it's not a new bit of software
and when you're talking about AGI you're
talking about software the set of
instructions that enable some system to
generate knowledge to generate
explanations that's what a person is but
even if you had this fully functional
Universal quantum computer again what
kind of program would you run on it what
is the set of instructions that you
would feed into it so that it became a
self-aware fully functioning artificial
general intelligence we don't know but
if we do find that program we have to
present an argument as to why it
wouldn't run on a classical computer
efficiently and why we would need a
quantum computer to do what it does
efficiently at the moment there is no
such Theory and we see no reason why it
should be the case that we need to have
a quantum computer to do this thing but
of course no one knows we're still in
the realm of the unknown let's get back
to quantum computers and David Wright's
quote Quantum computation is more than
just a faster more miniaturized
technology for implementing Turing
machines a quantum computer is a machine
that uses uniquely quantum mechanical
effects especially interference to
perform wholly new types of computation
that would be impossible even in
principle on any turing machine and
hence on any classical computer Quantum
computation is therefore nothing less
than a distinctively new way of
harnessing nature end quote so what
David's not saying there is that the
quantum computer can do more tasks of a
Kind it can still compute the site it
still has the same repertoire as what a
turing machine has it's just that it is
a different way of computing things that
no other computer could even in
principle do namely utilize interference
in particular these interference effects
are something that are a feature of
quantum physics but not a feature of
classical physics the interference
between particles particles as explained
in the chapter called Shadows here in
the fabric of reality particles that can
be observed and particles that in
principle cannot be observed except by
their effects on the particles that we
do see David goes on to say quote let me
elaborate that claim the earliest
inventions for harnessing nature were
tools powered by human muscles they
revolutionized our ancestor situation
but they suffered from the limitation
that they required can continuous human
attention and effort during every moment
of their use subsequent technology
overcame that limitation human beings
managed to domesticate certain animals
and plants turning the biological
adaptation in those organisms to human
ends thus the crops could grow and the
guard dogs could watch even while their
owners slept another new type of
Technology began when human beings went
beyond merely exploiting existing
adaptations and existing non-biological
phenomena such as fire and created
completely new adaptations in the world
in the form of pottery bricks Wheels
metal artifacts and machines to do this
they had to think about and understand
the natural laws governing the world
including as I have explained not only
its superficial aspects but the
underlying fabric of reality there
followed thousands of years of progress
in this type of of Technology end quote
that's I'm finishing the middle of a
sentence there but this is really
important stuff and again hints at the
beginning of infinity world view here in
the fabric of reality
what we're talking about here is the
human capacity to gradually come to some
understanding of the world and in coming
to understand the world to improve their
situation by creating technology which
automates some of the hard work turning
their perspiration into an opportunity
for doing other stuff and continuing to
improve their lives let's look at food
production we have long known that if
you grow this thing called wheat then it
can be used to produce this thing called
flour which when baked produces bread
which is a nutritious food for people
okay so what do you do if you've got
basically no tools at all well you take
the wheat and you bash it with a rock
and then you get the flower out of it
you're grinding the stuff you're
grinding the wheat into flour and that's
hard work and you need a lot of flour to
make a modest amount of bread you mix it
with water you mix it with salt you
stick it in your oven and you cook it
and you bake it okay I'm not teaching
anyone anything here about how bathing
of breadworks but how do we go from the
situation where we're bashing the thing
with rocks to something more automated
well you could take a big Stone wheel
you could take a big Stone wheel but how
do you drive the Big Stone wheel over
the top of all of your wheat so that you
don't have to do it well if you're not
going to push it maybe you can get your
animals to do it your domesticated
animals can walk around and around in a
circle crushing the wheat between Big
Stone Wheels that's great that works but
still you've got to feed the animals and
okay that's going to cost you something
because you're not eating those animals
now so there's some energy there you
know they're probably going to be eating
some of the wheat that you would
otherwise be eating all right maybe you
can take a big water wheel and the water
wheel will grind your flower and that
will do the work for you or a windmill
where the air is just doing the work for
you moving air currents are doing the
job of grinding the flour that you want
grinding the wheat into the flour okay
so now you're almost fully automated
you've got this windmill thing that is
able to do the job and of course
eventually what you have is you have
some sort of combustion engine steam
engine some some sort of combustion
engine anyway where it's being driven by
a fuel you put fuel into the thing and
it will just keep running so long as you
keep replenishing the fuel but the fuel
is highly dense in energy and so just a
small amount of fuel can do heaps and
heaps and heaps of work for you that's
great so now you're really on the way to
automating things and each time you
automate something and here we're just
talking about the Milling of wheat into
flour we're just talking about that
you've got all this time time to do what
time to think about the other problems
in your life and find solutions to those
and make things a heck of a lot better
this is what we should want to do this
is why by the way we shouldn't fear the
AI we should welcome it because it's
automating stuff and eventually we can
automate all of our drudgery into stuff
where we have time to reflect creatively
on the work that we do but each step of
that process requires knowledge to go
from bashing wheat with rocks very
little knowledge required there except
that you need to know that there's
actually nutrition inside of that crop
that you grow that wheat to this wheel
thing and you figure out ah this wheel
it actually has less friction and
requires less work to push the wheel
than to lift up the Rock and well if we
can get something to push the wheel for
us we can learn that domestic that
there's such a thing as domesticating
animals they can be trained then there
we've learned something and oh look the
river is moving the river can do some
work for us let's turn the wheel into a
water wheel ah the wind can do the same
thing maybe we can do that eventually
you figure out aha when you heat up
something like water it expands this
idea of water expanding and able to do
work inside of a combustion engine in
the form of the Piston leads to this
idea that we can actually have steam
engines machines we have to understand
something about how to improve the
efficiency of those things with a
limited amount of fuel and so we begin
to create our knowledge of mechanics and
physics so it's this whole
problem-solving vision of the world and
the ability to explain stuff that enable
us unlike any other creature that exists
in the universe so far as we know to
improve our circumstance this ability to
model create a model of the rest of
physical reality to explain the rest of
physical reality through understanding
physical reality we're confronted with
problems we have to conjecture Solutions
and this list of things that David has
talked about here is this gradual
ratcheting up of knowledge this
climbing a ladder so to speak where each
rung of the ladder is only made possible
by the fact that we have the rungs below
it we've made a little bit of progress
previously and we can build upon that to
go a little bit higher conjecturing all
our way never getting to the top never
having finality and perhaps discarding a
particular ladder at times and
constructing a whole new one that is
that is able to take us to places that
are far better than where we thought we
were going to go in the first place so
let's just recap because David says
there that in understanding coming to
realize what these natural laws are that
govern the world the understanding of
the fabric of reality what happened then
there followed thousands of years of
progress in this type of Technology
harnessing some of the materials forces
and energies of physics in the 20th
century information was added to this
list when the invention of computers
allowed complex information processing
to be performed outside human brains
Quantum computation which is now in its
early infancy is the distinct further
step in this progression end quote
notice there as well this idea that a
computer is simply processing some of
the information outside of the brain in
a sense we could also say this about pen
and paper but sometimes we can't store
all of the numbers that we need in our
working memory and so if we write them
down then this is a great way of
calculating mathematicians have done
this for a long time this is one of the
reasons writing systems was such a burn
to mathematics as well because very few
of us some people can they can train
their brains to just remember a 12 digit
number and then remember another six
digit number and multiply these two
things together and to figure out now
many of us can't do that but almost all
of us can be trying to do that with pen
and paper so in a sense some of the
computation is being done outside yes
the processing is being done in here the
creative conjectures are going on inside
of our minds however the memory is being
stored on pieces of paper using pens a
computer is just the next step in that
kind of thing where the processing some
of the processing is being done outside
some of the memory is being left outside
being automated and so although an
astronomer can very well understand the
laws that govern the motion of celestial
bodies how it is that the solar system
works in the way that it does why it is
that Mars moves around the Sun in the
way that it does and they could in
principle write down the equations and
then calculate through given the
conditions given you know where exactly
Mars is today what the mass of the Sun
is at the moment and so on and so forth
how far Mars is from the sudden they
could figure out where Mars was going to
be three years from now sure far better
that given that they already understand
this stuff to have the computer do it
much much faster than what they could
ever possibly hope to do it with pen and
paper much less inside of their minds
calculating inside of their minds that
have no hope of doing that because well
one reason is our memory is limited our
working memory inside of our brains is
limited in some way that we don't
understand some people can improve their
Memories by the way see these people
that can remember like phone books of
information literally you know remember
pi to thousands of decimal places that
kind of thing so the the brain is
capable of doing these astonishing Feats
of memory but also why you know the the
primary function the primary function of
a human brain is to solve particular
problems and to solve the problems that
you're interested in by conjecturing
explanations and refuting the bad
explanations and making progress and all
that stuff that we talk about it's not
manly to demonstrate its amazing
capacity to remember stuff because one
of the thing things that the brain has
been able to figure out is how to
Outsource how to Outsource the memory to
paper how to Outsource memory to mobile
phones how to Outsource memory to
regular computers and that kind of thing
to libraries we don't need to worry
about trying to remember so much
information and indeed in many
situations we don't even have to worry
about how to process certain information
as well I don't need to worry about how
to multiply huge numbers I don't even
need to know although I do the algorithm
that is required in order to do it with
the pen and paper why because I know how
to use a calculator I know how to use my
computer to do this thing that's enough
I can do it far faster than anyone else
who doesn't have access to those things
okay I can always outperform someone at
a task which requires computation where
they don't have a computer but I do and
in this day and age I can find the
answer to almost any question that a
person would otherwise have really good
knowledge of but I don't have good
knowledge of if you just give me access
to Wikipedia and Wolfram Alpha and chat
GPT and the internet and Google and that
kind of thing
in this circumstance that we have people
need to look for open problems open
interesting problems problems of
interest to them yeah sure that does
require building up some body of
pre-existing knowledge to background
knowledge so you know where the open
problems are you know what problems
haven't yet been solved but this is the
fortunate position we now find ourselves
in with respect to our ancestors who
didn't know what was already known they
didn't know that someone on the other
side of the world had already figured
out the answer to their problem if only
they did they could have collaborated
and they could have worked on something
new together rather than people
simultaneously figuring out the same
thing I'm also not denigrating knowledge
in anything that I say there of course
not you know my whole thing is knowledge
people should want to improve their own
knowledge if only to understand the
structure of it and so therefore how to
improve the knowledge they do have in
the areas that they wish to know about
but you know I'm a big proponent of yes
try and gain some general knowledge
about everything because everything is
inherently interesting know a little bit
of History know a little bit of science
know a little bit of mathematics know a
little bit of politics know a little bit
about music is one area where I fall
down a little bit of bad language is
again I'm deficient in those areas but
but try and learn a little bit about
everything because you will find that
things are absolutely fascinating as
people get older they tend to become
fascinated by history the older you get
the more fascinated by history you get
people can become fascinated by the
Classics with the classics in philosophy
or the classics and literature and so on
and so forth I think that having a wide
repertoire of approaches to these things
is really important so in saying that
well the computer can do it all for you
now you can always Google stuff you can
always Wikipedia stuff yes that's true
and that that is increasingly more true
and it's just to say you don't have to
remember a huge body of knowledge that
is not to say that a huge body of
knowledge is not in and of itself of
value of interesting value to you
because it can spark your curiosity
about things it's not to say you need to
remember every single date about every
single important facet of World War II
let's say in order to say you have an
understanding of World War II but you
should have an understanding of World
War II it's useful to know that whether
or not you know precisely the date and
the time of when the landing on the
beach of Normandy occurred or why it was
needed well that's another thing but you
know people should have a good vision of
what human knowledge is in our
civilization at this given time broadly
speaking a nice overview of the
landscape so to speak is of use to a
citizen and of use to a person would I
compel people to learn this no because I
don't know specifically how deep you
might want to dive on any one particular
area is there a particular minimum you
would want to prescribe no I don't think
so again I think it's all just about
personal interest but if you really do
pursue knowledge you'll just find that
everything is just naturally of interest
to some extent and it'll be a different
extent for everyone and you don't need
to mandate this as I keep on saying it
just naturally is the case you don't
need to mandate it because people are
naturally fascinated by it which is my
point about as people get older they
tend to get interested in history anyway
even if while they're going through
school it seems like one of the more
boring subjects given history teachers
we shouldn't put all the blame on the
poor history teachers or given the way
the history books are structured and
that kind of thing but it simply is the
case that history is not exactly one of
the most popular subjects at school kind
of like science at times as well
although I think that's changing a
little bit anyway way off topic that was
a bit of a rant let's go back to the
book and take the drones quote Quantum
computation which is now in its early
infancy is a distinct further step in
this progression it will be the first
technology that allows useful tasks to
be performed in collaboration between
parallel universes a quantum computer
would be capable of Distributing
components of a complex task among vast
numbers of parallel universes and then
sharing the results end quote yes and
quite right and this is where people
begin to book oh well how do you know
these parallel universes exist and so on
and so forth well that's been dealt with
earlier on in the book that's the first
thing to say about this the second thing
to say about this is as David will come
to and as many people have observed
before if you want to factorize this
huge number and there is a way known
that the quantum computer could do this
in principle Shaw's algorithm as we will
come to the factorizing of these huge
numbers which could not possibly be done
by a computer in our universe even if
the entire universe all the matter in
the universe was repurposed to build to
construct the ultimate classical
computer the fastest and biggest
classical computer operating by the
means that all the other computers that
we have that exist that are not Quantum
operate by and even if the switching
speed of the transistors were moving at
line speed you still wouldn't be able to
factorize certain numbers within some
billions or perhaps even trillions of
years so if a quantum computer can do it
and it can do it then where is the
computation being performed where is it
being done it can't possibly just be
done in this universe after all there's
not enough computational resources in
this universe to do that but if it is
done and if it's done in a little box
somewhere in a laboratory somewhere that
feat is accomplished it can't be
accomplished just in that box it must be
that box and more and what is the and
more well it's the other boxes and other
universes working in concert with that
particular box interfering the mechanics
that's going on the quantum mechanics
that's going on inside the internal work
into the box sharing the problem of that
computation the computational task with
the other universes so that's how it
works that's the only way known that it
could possibly do what it does and it
can possibly be done that's the thing
have we done it yet no because we
haven't yet built a universal quantum
computer capable of doing such a thing
but we will one day problems are soluble
perhaps it's taking a little longer than
what we hoped but you know so too is
Interstellar travel there's a lot of
things in flying cars as people say
sometimes we make huge advances
information technology smartphones no
one really saw smartphones on the
horizon we we sometimes get the gift we
didn't even ask for and didn't expect
and sometimes we don't we just have to
keep persevering and making the progress
let's keep going David Wright it's quite
I have already mentioned the
significance of computational
universality the fact that a single
physically possible computer can given
enough time and memory perform any
computation that any other physically
possible computer can perform the laws
of physics as we currently know them do
admit computational universality however
to be at all useful or significant in
the overall scheme of things
universality as I have defined it up to
now is not sufficient it merely means
that the universal computer can
eventually do what any other computer
can do in other words given enough time
it is universal but what if it is not
given enough time imagine a universal
computer that could only execute one
computational step in the whole lifetime
of the universe would its universality
still be a profound property of reality
presumably not to put that more
generally one can criticize this narrow
notion of universality because it
classifies a task as being in a
computer's repertoire regardless of the
physical resources that the computer
would expend in performing the task thus
for instance we have considered a
virtual reality user who was prepared to
go into a suspended animation for
billions of years while the computer
calculates what to share next in
discussing the ultimate limits of
virtual reality that is the appropriate
attitude for us to take but when we are
considering the usefulness of virtual
reality or what is even more important
the fundamental role that it plays in
the fabric of reality we must be more
discriminating Evolution would never
have got off the ground if the task of
rendering certain properties of the
earliest simplest habitats had not been
tractable that is computable in a
reasonable time using readily available
molecules as computers likewise Science
and Technology would never have gone off
the ground if designing a stone tool had
required a thousand years of thinking
end quote okay so what is David saying
there in talking about this idea of
universality computational universality
as being a fundamental feature of the
fabric of reality why should it be a
fundamental thing well because the laws
of physics didn't have to be such that
we could build devices which could be
used to compute calculate predict model
the rest of physical reality to help us
to gain an understanding of the very
laws themselves that enable everything
that happens to happen everything
possible that can possibly happen that
can possibly happen and rule out the
things that can't possibly happen the
laws of physics are such that we can
have these devices called computers that
are Universal that can have within them
the capacity to simulate any physically
possible process that's a remarkable
feature of the fabric of reality as it
is given by the laws of physics as we
understand them so the fact that it is
possible for these devices to be built
much less that we have built them you
know certainly in the case of classical
computers is a fundamental feature of
the fabric of reality David Deutsch has
made the point on other occasions that
many people are somehow more fascinated
by the idea of the simulation hypothesis
this idea that the entire universe
itself reality physical reality actually
is running on a computer somewhere that
that is not as astonishing a claim as
all as significant Acclaim as the fact
that computers are possible in the first
place that Universal computers are able
to be built within our universe and then
used to model anything else and
therefore help us to solve problems come
to a deeper understanding of everything
else as well and just to discard that
simulation hypothesis for a minute
anyway
it doesn't solve anything it never
solves anything to say that this reality
that we occupy this apparent physical
reality is running on a computer
somewhere or other it's precisely the
same problem as saying well to solve the
mystery of existence we just postulate
this omnipotent God that has created it
all well that doesn't solve anything in
particular it doesn't solve the problem
of who created God and if you say well
God needs no Creator you're just moving
the problem elsewhere you could just say
all the physical reality needs no
Creator or it's the same answer and if
but the the problem with the simulation
hypothesis is that you say well if this
physical reality we occupy isn't genuine
physical reality it's a simulated one
and we all exist inside the simulator
many of us want to ask the question
where is the computer on which the
simulation is running and what laws of
physics does it operate by are the laws
of physics in the universe where the
computer is running this simulation of
this physical reality are those laws of
physics different and is that inside of
another simulation and so on with
different laws of physics so on ad
infinitum this isn't solving anything
this is proliferating worse problems
without us without us making any
progress this is philosophy for
philosophy's sake not solving a an
actual problem but rather conjecturing
problems into existence whose Solutions
we do not have and we cannot hope to
have given any understanding of the
physical world in which we find
ourselves at the moment anyway it is as
I like to say philosophy purely in the
abstract it's not connected to the
physical world which is philosophy at
its best is able to do that in some way
shape or form the philosophy is able to
connect to our physical world it doesn't
mean it has to be testable and physical
world that's science but it has to have
some connection to us if it has no
connection to us even in principle then
it's uninteresting by that metric no one
can it can affect anyone so it can't be
interesting you know what is the what
are the physical laws governing the
universe 10 rooms over running a
simulation of a world that is kind of
like ours well we're not there and we're
never going to be part of that and
apparently whatever the laws are that
are governing this universe prohibit us
from even getting outside of this
universe and so postulating the
existence of these other logically
possible universes which are running
computers which themselves contain
civilizations and worlds and whatever
else
is purely abstract thinking with no
connection and what I say is it's
inherently uninteresting in the sense
that it doesn't possibly solve any
problems here that could affect people
that aside David has talked about here
this notion that happily the laws of
physics are such that we can make
progress in reasonable time it is
possible to design stuff like stone
tools and they allow us to make progress
which leads to more progress and opens
up new problems which themselves provide
Solutions which enable more rapid
progress still so the laws of physics
are such that this is able to be done by
creative people he goes on to say quote
moreover what was true at the beginning
has remained an absolute condition for
Progress at every step computational
universality would not be much use to
genes no matter how much knowledge they
contained if rendering their organism
were an intractable task say if one
reproductive cycle took billions of
years the thus the fact that there are
complex organisms and that there has
been a succession of gradually improving
inventions and scientific theories such
as Galilean mechanics Newtonian
mechanics einsteinian mechanics quantum
mechanics Etc tells us something more
about what sort of computational
universality exists in nature it tells
us that the actual laws of physics are
thus far at least capable of being
successively approximated by theories
that give ever better explanations and
predictions and that the task of
discovering each Theory given the
previous one has been computationally
tractable given the previously known
laws and the previously available
technology the fabric of reality must be
as it would layered for easy access end
quote that's fantastic this gives the
idea of emergence to some extent that
you have this emergent simplicity so far
as we know at the moment we have this
Theory quantum theory and quantum
mechanics which explains how it is that
motion occurs between particles
everything's made out of particles in
the universe so therefore it is a
universal theory of how stuff happens
generally however there are these
emergent laws these these laws that seem
to apply at certain scales there's this
layered aspect to reality so that
Newtonian mechanics Works to a good
approximation for low velocity and big
things but not too big not so big as you
know whole galaxies or stars or
something like that where the
gravitational effects then have effects
that normally aren't noticed at smaller
scales there's emergent Simplicity where
biological organisms and indeed whole
ecosystems appear to obey laws which are
not easily derived from the laws of
quantum theory there is this emergent
Simplicity as we like to say here
there's no point talking about the
causes and the reasons why the
explanations for what happened during
the second world war in terms of
physical laws the laws of Dynamics
what's going on at the level of quantum
theory with the particles no you want an
explanation in terms of tyranny and
Liberty things like force and bombs and
Invasion and leaders and Adolf Hitler
and Winston Churchill this is the level
of analysis that you want in order to
come to an understanding of what's going
on to generate an explanation of what's
going on being able to in principle
predict the motion of particles is not
able to get you one jot closer to
understanding what's going on in the
overwhelming majority of phenomena that
happen amongst humans in their
civilization or even the universe as a
whole it will get you a lot in terms of
understanding how particles behave of
course absolutely everything's made out
of particles so it gives you some
insight into the behavior of the
universe as a whole but at one
particular level one strata if you like
of knowledge but it's not the only
strata of knowledge that the world is
layered as David says there there are
there there are these layers too coming
to understand the world and we can have
more and more six we can have better and
better approximations to things as well
which which introduces this notion of
improving computation over time our
first computers were these special
purpose computers okay we mentioned the
antikythera mechanism earlier this Greek
computer over 2000 years old that was
found it was an exquisitely special
purpose so far as we know it was
designed in order to predict the motion
of Heavenly Bodies Okay so to know where
the moon was going to be any day of the
week any hour of the day many years in
advance so it could predict eclipses it
could predict where the sun was going to
appear on the sky it could predict where
the planets were going to be with
relation to the constellations they
appeared in in the zodiac
it was special purpose why because the
laws of physics as understood at that
time were just purely mechanical
classical laws in Greek times
Aristotle's physics of some sort or
other which kinda resembled what Galileo
kind of came to know and of course you
had babbage's idea of a computer of a
Kind resting upon Newtonian laws and it
still through to Turing turing's idea of
computation still rested upon some
notion of classical physics as well but
we had an improvement in computation as
the improvement in our understanding of
physics progressed then we continued to
have improvements in technology as well
until we're at the point today where we
have this notion of quantum computation
unifying turing's idea about the
computer about a universal computer with
Quantum computation recognizing that
whatever the computer is made out of
it's made out of matter which are both
Quantum laws of physics David Deutsch
unites these two things into this field
of quantum computation is it the final
step in computation one would imagine
not because once you have a unification
in some way shape or form of quantum
stuff and gravity then you have perhaps
a new mode of computation I've already
imagined the the the the fantasy idea of
a computer so large that it was built
out of all the matter in the universe
can you imagine such a computer if you
can if you could imagine a computer the
size of a Galaxy okay there are many
galaxies throughout the universe so one
Galaxy is Tiny Middle School compared to
the volume of the universe if you could
in some distant future take all of the
matter within a Galaxy and turn it into
a computer you'd have some interesting
effects going on because if in theory
that could be done and it could operate
at the speed of light well aside from
the fact it would take a long time for
memory in one part of the computer to
ever communicate with memory in another
part of computer you'd also have
gravitational effects with something
like that and if you have gravitational
effects with something like that because
it's simply so huge it is warping the
background space and time and it's
affecting the trajectories of whatever
the thing is made out of if it's
transmitting photons from one place to
another those photons are now following
curved paths and so the computation
presumably would be operating via a
different mode some sort of quantum
gravity computer who knows we're
thinking in terms of science fiction
here but my point is there would be a
mode of computation beyond the quantum
computer as we understand it now it
would involve also taking account of the
effects of gravity now what's beyond
that who knows who knows what
Constructor Theory would reveal in the
distant future as well as our theories
improve our predictions about the
Motions of particles become more precise
and our capacity to take advantage of
such predictions in order to generate
technology of high precision and high
accuracy improves in lockstep as well
all of this rests upon coming to a
deeper understanding of reality creating
the knowledge of how it is that all this
stuff works David goes on to say quote
likewise if we think of evolution itself
as a computation it tells us that there
have been sufficiently many vibe herbal
organisms coded for by DNA to allow
better adapted ones to be computed I.E
to evolve using the resources provided
by their worst adapted predecessors so
we can infer that the laws of physics in
addition to mandating their own
comprehensibility through the Turing
principle ensure that the corresponding
evolutionary processes such as life and
thought are neither too time consuming
nor require too many resources of any
other kind to occur in reality end quote
so this is this beautiful idea of
self-similarity again that we've got
here that the laws of physics mandate
their own comprehensibility through the
Turing principle elevating the Turing
principle Beyond regular physical laws
that any physical law that is now
discovered needs to comport to this idea
of the Turing principle because the laws
of physics are themselves computable
right because that is proven that is one
of the things that is proved by David
Deutsch's proof that if the world is
quantum you can build these things
called quantum computers the and
computers can simulate any physically
possible process and the physically
possible processes are those ones which
are governed by the laws of physics so
you can model in your computer things
that obey physical laws because you can
model matter and matter is the stuff
that obeys physical laws would the
discovery of a quantum gravity computer
change any of this well presumably yes
but would it radically overturn
all of the possibilities that quantum
computers open up for us no I imagine it
would only widen the repertoire it would
make things even more Universal there
are degrees of universality you could
have a computer that is a more Universal
that could model all the effects of
gravity which presumably there may be
something that a presently existing
quantum computer might not be able to do
I don't know this is beyond me perhaps a
computer that can take advantage of
gravitational waves in some way shape or
form
might be able to do computations that
are different to the repertoire of
computations that can be done by a
regular quantum computer again I could
be wrong about that but the thing is
quantum physics is not a theory of
gravity which includes things like
gravitational waves David goes on to say
quote so the laws of physics not only
permit or as I have argued require the
existence of life and thought they
require them to be in some appropriate
sense efficient to express this crucial
property of reality modern analyzes of
universality usually postulate computers
that are Universal in an even stronger
sense of ensuring principle would on the
face of it require not only are
Universal virtual reality generators
possible it is possible to build them so
they do not require impractically large
resources to render simple aspects of
reality from now on when I refer to
universality I shall mean it in this
sense unless otherwise stated let's just
reflect a little on what is said there
so this is in line with David Deutsch's
more recent philosophy as well about
constructive theory the possible and the
impossible but also this notion that
nothing happens randomly the world is
not probabilistic what happens happens
as a matter of being determined by the
laws of physics what happens is
determined so therefore when he says the
laws of physics not only permits but as
I have argued require the existence of
life and thought now why would he say
that why isn't it just the fact that
life and thought could arise it doesn't
necessarily well the fact that it has
arisen means that it's determined to
have risen right if you run the
Multiverse experiment again then you get
the Multiverse you get all the
physically possible universes this one
that we occupy we look back and we see a
series of events that happens that are
not random it's an actual history that
has led to us there are reasons why life
has arisen there are reasons why life
which is able to think has
we can provide an explanation it's not
like a vanishingly small sliver of the
Multiverse no this is an important part
branch of the Multiverse one would
imagine many branches of Multiverse and
when life arises then this is a form of
knowledge instantiation in the universe
knowledge is resistant information
information that can survive the slings
and arrows that the cosmos throws at it
once you get people you get these
creative thinkers then you have
explanatory knowledge which is the most
resistant entity in the universe as
Chiara maalato has put it in her books
and as David Deutsch no doubt would
agree the most powerful force
effectively for speaking metaphorically
in the universe able to construct around
it a shield if you like against the
otherwise
inhospitable implacably Dark Void that
is the rest of the universe and it will
go on replicating constructing building
itself designing new structure pictures
coming to a deeper understanding of the
reality that it occupies and shaping
that reality around us so this is the
sense in which the laws of physics
require the existence of life and
thought simply because we are here and
it's not a chance random event I know
that people normally like to talk in
this way especially when it comes to
random mutation and selection yes but
but there's only a finite finite
mutations that can happen some of them
are selected for now why well the
universe selects things that are going
to succeed in a given Universe We Are
One such thought is one such thing so
this is why this world this isn't yet
another reason why this world view is
profound
things are determined to exist they're
not just random spontaneously generated
stuff it's not a roll of the dice it's
not probabilistic stuff happens and some
branches of the Multiverse yeah life
didn't arise thought didn't arise but
that's not what we're talking about
we're talking about arising in the
Multiverse not in every single Universe
in the Multiverse in physical reality
which it has why because it's determined
to have done so why because that's what
the laws of quantum theory say a
fantastic idea this one let's get going
and we'll we'll finish up uh shortly
because already I've spoken too long in
just this first episode so I was
planning on perhaps only doing two
episodes but I think we're going to go
to three somehow when it comes to this
Quantum computation uh chapter here in
the fabric of reality David goes on to
say quote just how efficiently can given
aspects of reality be rendered what
computations in other words are
practicable in a given time and under
are given budget this is the basic
question of computational complexity
Theory which as I have said is the study
of the resources that are required to
perform given computational tasks
complexity theory has not yet been
sufficiently well integrated with
physics to give many quantitative
answers however it has made a fair
amount of Headway in defining a useful
Rough and Ready distinction between
tractable and intractable computational
tasks the general approach is best
illustrated by an example consider the
task of multiplying together two rather
large numbers say 4 million 220 851 and
2 594 209 many of us remember the method
we learned in childhood for performing
such multiplications involves
multiplying each digit of one number in
turn by the digit of the other number in
term while shifting and adding the
results in a standard way to give the
final answer in other words pausing them
my reflection in other words this idea
of adding a zero adding two zeros as a
placeholder so that you can do this
computation everyone learns this method
now I'm not going to read the entirety
of this section of the chapter I'll just
explain it in my own words so this idea
that you have this algorithm that people
learn of how to multiply two numbers
together if you have to multiply 54
times 92 okay you know how to do that
and someone teaches you how to do that
then if you add a third digit if you say
instead of 54 we're going to do 542 and
we're going to multiply that by 923 it's
not that much harder it takes you a
little bit longer it doesn't take you
double the amount of time however it
doesn't become intractable and if you
can program your computer to multiply
two digit numbers together then the
multiplying two three digit numbers
together is not that much harder it's
not going to double the amount of time
it's going to add a little bit more time
onto the calculation it's not going to
double it or triple it or anything like
that however the reverse operation does
become intractable if you have to find
the factors of a particular number and
when I say factors I should say prime
factors of a number it can be a heck of
a lot harder you know take it um 10
times 10 people can just automatically
say well it's 100 okay they learn that
off by heart and if you don't know it
off by heart you can figure it out
pretty quickly but if I say to you what
are the prime factors of 100 then it's
then people you know take a little bit
longer generally to do this particular
calculation it just takes longer having
just told you 10 times 10 you might
immediately leak to well 10 is 5 times 2
and the other 10 is 5 times 2 so you've
got five times two times five times two
okay so you've got 5 times 5 which is 5
squared times 2 squared okay and that's
the prime factorization they're the
prime factors of 100 2 squared times 5
squared gives you 100. you can do this
for any number every number can be
decomposed into its prime factors it's a
fun thing for kids to learn to do by the
way if you're interested in teaching
kids about arithmetic this it actually
turns out to be a fun kind of challenge
this is intractable however as soon as
you stay adding digits to your number
things begin to spiral out of control
for any two digit number okay it's
reasonably easy to do this kind of thing
you know let's take the number that's
one less than 199 okay so let's find the
prime factors of that well now you've
got 9 times 11 all right 9 is not a
prime number but 11 is a prime number so
what's what the factors of 9 well 3
squared so you've got 3 squared times 11
there you go that's the prime
factorization of 99 but now that's a two
digit number three digit number 100 so
let's start adding you know digits you
know pick any old four digit number that
you like you know within reason 2 525
okay 2525 it ends in a five therefore
it's divisible by five so divide it by
five you can already see that things are
going to get a little bit more tricky
here each time you add a digit you know
five digit long number six digit long
number Things become harder to decompose
into their prime factors now there's
even a special case of this what if you
take two really huge prime numbers that
are known to be Prime and you multiply
them together to get an unbelievably
huge number which you know you know only
has two factors namely the two prime
numbers that you've multiplied together
there are no two other numbers in the
universe that exist in in reality
physical or abstract that can be
multiplied together to give you that
particular number so these two huge
prime numbers when multiplied together
give you a third even bigger number now
if you take that third even bigger
number and give that as a problem to
someone or a computer somewhere to try
and figure out the prime decomposition
of no hope no hope because you just
don't know where to begin you start to
the only way of doing this the only way
of doing prime factorization is to run
through in sequence one at a time all
the numbers that could possibly all the
prime numbers that could possibly be
factors so you start with two you see if
the number is divisible by two if it is
hey happy days but if it's not well you
move on to three then from three you go
to five and seven you know the prime
numbers you're dividing your big number
by prime numbers now if the only two
prime numbers that can be multiplied
together the only two factors are
already huge numbers it's going to take
you forever to get through and when I
say forever I mean like almost literally
forever okay that your lifetime the
universe is Lifetime okay this is the
basis of certain kinds of cryptographic
security okay so that's Brett Hall's
explanation of this let's go to the book
and we'll see what David Deutsch has to
say about some of this kind of stuff he
comes back to it towards the end by the
way and I'll just I'll just pick it up
where he he defines a little bit more
precisely what tractability means so the
fact that you can multiply two numbers
together that's a tractable problem but
decomposing them into their prime
factors is an intractable problem why
he says Christ what counts for
tractability according to the standard
definitions it's not the actual time
taken to multiply a particular pair of
numbers but the fact that the time does
not increase too sharply when we apply
the same method to ever larger numbers
perhaps surprisingly this rather
indirect way of defining tractability
works very well in practice for many
though not all important classes of
computational tasks for example with
multiplication we can easily see that
the standard method can be used to
multiply numbers that are say about 10
times as large with very little extra
work suppose for the sake of argument
that each Elementary multiplication of
one digit by another takes a certain
computer one microsecond including the
time taken to perform the additions
shifts and other operations that follow
each Elementary multiplication when we
are multiplying you know two seven digit
numbers then the total time David
provides an example the total time
required for the multiplication if the
operations are performed sequentially
will be 7 times 7 or 49 microseconds for
inputs roughly 10 times as large as
these which would have eight digits each
the time required to multiply them would
be 64 microseconds an increase of only
31 percent end quote Okay so we've got
this increase of 31 if we just add an
extra digit onto our seven digit numbers
so now we're multiplying to eight digit
numbers together which is tractable okay
that so the time takes a little bit
longer but it's not a massive increase
okay so let's take that same concept
that we've got this hypothetical
computer that can multiply these numbers
together David goes on to say about this
we've got two 125 digit numbers now why
would you want 125 digit numbers number
because of cryptography trying to keep
information secure especially on the
internet requires this kind of
multiplication and division to go on
okay so let's say uh you're interested
in multiplying to 125 digit numbers what
David says about this quote products of
prime numbers of 125 digits on so are of
great interest to cryptographers our
hypothetical machine could multiply two
such prime numbers together making a 250
digit product in just over a hundredth
of a second in one second it could
multiply two one thousand digit numbers
and real computers available today can
easily improve upon those timings only a
few researchers in esoteric branches of
pure mathematics are interested in
performing such incomprehensibly vast
modifications yet we see that even they
have no reason to regard multiplication
as intractable by contrast
factorization essentially the reverse of
multiplication seems much more difficult
and quite and I've already explained
what the process of factorization is you
take some large number and you figure
out what the factors are what numbers
you would multiply together to get that
number and when we talk about
factorization we're really talking about
what are the prime numbers that can be
multiplied together to give that final
number and just remember revision maths
revision lesson for anyone who's
interested in this stuff for people who
might have forgotten prime numbers are
like the atoms of numbers they are the
atomic numbers if you like every other
number can be made up of a combination
by multiplying them just by separating
them by multiplication signs of prime
numbers integers I should say of course
integers so again the number 10 is made
up of the prime factors two and five and
there are no other prime factors okay
the number 12 is made up of the prime
factors of 3 times 2 squared and then
there are no other different ways of
multiplying numbers together to get 12
Prime numbers together to get 12. this
is what we're after but as the numbers
get big it becomes very very hard to
figure out what the prime numbers are
that make that number up let's say we
take David uses this example let's say
we took a prime number some some number
we know is prime it's a big number four
million 220 851 there's one and another
number two million 594 209 both of these
are prime numbers now we're going to
multiply them together we're going to
get the answer of 10 trillion 949
billion 769 million 651 859 okay so
there we have this huge number this 10
trillion number what are its factors
well we know because we've just
multiplied them together but for anyone
who doesn't know anyone who doesn't know
good luck somehow they they have to work
through the list of prime numbers now
starting at two going to three five
seven eleven and so on until they get to
the number four million 220 851. they
would have found that prime number and
then once they find that printer well
actually they would have found the other
one first right if they're going
sequential they would have found two
million 594 209 now how many prime
numbers are between two and that number
there I don't know you could easily look
that one up but presumably a computer
could do this but you don't have to
imagine a much bigger problem number
than this where the computer will take
too long to do this David goes on to say
in fact in explaining what I've just
explained but let me go into it but
after saying there is no easy method of
doing this the method is just what I've
said quote the most obvious method of
factorization is to divide the input
number by all possible factors starting
with two and continuing with every odd
number until one of them divides the
input exactly at least one of the
factors assuming the input is not a
prime can be no larger than the input
square root and that provides an
estimate of how long the method might
take in the case we are considering our
computer would find the smaller one of
the two factors two million 594 209 in
just over a second however
key point however an input 10 times as
large would have a square root that was
about three times as large so factoring
it by this method would take up to three
times as long in other words adding one
digit to the input would now triple the
running time adding another would triple
it again and so on so the running time
would increase in geometric proportion
that is exponentially with the number of
digits in the number we are factoring
factorizing a number with 25 digit
factors by this method would occupy all
the computers on Earth for centuries
the method can be improved upon but all
methods of factorization currently in
use have this exponential increased
property the largest number that has
been factorized in Anger as it were a
number whose factors were secretly
chosen by mathematicians in order to
present a challenge to other
mathematicians had 129 digits the
factorization was achieved after an
appeal on the Internet by a global
Cooperative effort involving thousands
of computers the computer scientist
Donald knuth has estimated that the
factorization of a 250 digit number
using the most efficient known methods
would take over a million years on a
network of a million computers
such things are difficult to estimate
but even if knuth is being too
pessimistic one need only consider
numbers with a few more digits and the
task will be many times harder that is
what we mean by saying that the
factorization of large numbers is
intractable all this is a far cry from
multiplication where as we have seen the
task of multiplying a pair of 250 50
digit numbers is a triviality on
anyone's home computer no one can even
conceive of how one might factorize
thousand digit numbers or million digit
numbers at least no one could conceive
of it until recently end quote that's
where I'll end for today because we know
now the answer we know that Quantum
computation comes to the rescue of this
now we can't do it yet we don't have a
universal quantum computer that can
actually do this kind of factorization
we know it can be done in principle we
just can't yet do it in practice and
next time we're going to talk more about
that and we're going to talk about the
distinction between
Quantum events which contain uncertainty
and classical events which also can
contain uncertainty the idea of
classical uncertainty leads to
complexity Theory and leads to this
notion of Chaos Theory which is David
Sison is in in the chapter here about to
come up was fashionable at the time when
the this the fabric of reality is being
written I remember that quite clearly as
well that when I bought the fabric of
reality other books on the shelves were
quite a number about complexity Theory
and Chaos Theory the mind of God by Paul
Davies contained stuff about Chaos
Theory there was a forget the name of
the book now but there was a book there
about non-linear differential equations
and I ended up taking a subject in
University about non-linear differential
equations because it became absolutely
fascinated by this idea that you could
have these systems which became chaotic
they were perfectly deterministic but
were exquisitely sensitive to the
initial conditions now as David will
explain you don't get these chaotic
effects in reality this Butterfly Effect
is one that is talked about most often
the butterfly flaps its wings in Mexico
and then there's a hurricane produced on
the other side of the world you know
there's a cyclone in Brisbane or
something like that well this doesn't
happen in reality that's chaos theory
right if the world was governed by
classical physics that could have happen
why could that happen the reason why it
could happen under classical physics is
because the air being disturbed by the
butterfly will never Decay exactly to
zero in classical physics much like
under Newtonian mechanics classical
gravity let's say there's never a point
at which the gravitational effect Falls
to zero it just doesn't happen and so
too with the butterfly flapping its
wings it moves a little bit of air
around in its local vicinity and then a
little bit further away the disturbance
of the air is smaller and a little bit
further away still the disturbing to the
area smaller but it never gets to zero
it just decays to smaller and smaller
and smaller amounts leading to the
possibility of chaotic effects because
that small amount can be just the right
amount of kick to cause something else
to amplify
but under quantum theory effects can and
do Decay to zero the electromagnetic
theory of light that requires us or that
asks of us to conceive of light for
example as being a wave also would imply
that light never gets to zero intensity
that if you shine a light you can
continue to turn it down ever dimmer and
dimmer and dimmer and you never get to a
minimum amount of dimness quantum theory
says quite the opposite you do you get
down to these individual photons of
light you can get to a smallest possible
amount and the next step down is zero
under classical physics there is no
smallest possible amount
and so you just Decay ever more closely
asymptotically to zero this is not
quantum theory however so the butterfly
effect doesn't exist under quantum
theory that same kind of butterfly
effect does not exist under quantum
theory precisely because the disturbance
of the air can Decay to zero the amount
of energy can reach a minimum below
which you just don't have any effects at
all okay so that's what we can look
forward to next time a discussion of
this kind of a thing but we've set the
scene now for why it is the Quantum
computation can be a revolution in some
areas for example in this idea of
cryptography not to mention all the
other ways in which the real world
consists of actual Quantum objects like
molecules which at the moment cannot be
accurately modeled by any computer any
classical computer but could be modeled
by a quantum computer but until next
time bye-bye
foreign
[Music]
up up up up